**Human Footprint**

Human Footprint data are a standardized measure of cumulative human pressures on the environment that take into account the extent of built environments, crop land, pasture land, human population density, night-time lights, railways, roads and navigable waterways15. The Human Footprint ranges between values of 0 and 50, calculated at a 1 km2 resolution across the Earth’s terrestrial surface. Land can be considered human-dominated rather than ‘natural’ using a Human Footprint value threshold of 4 or greater22; a value of 0 is equivalent to no detectable human pressures of the type incorporated in the index. Human Footprint maps for 1993 and 2009 were downloaded from the Dryad Digital Repository49. It has been used to measure and classify habitat degradation22, connectivity for species50, global wilderness decline23 and the extent of human influence on protected areas51.

**Anthromes**

Anthropogenic biomes (anthromes) characterize the human-altered form and dynamics of terrestrial ecosystems14. They denote long-term patterns in human populations and their land use, taking into account population density, agricultural village development, percentage cover by crops, pasture and rice,
irrigated land area and areas potentially covered by trees52,53. Anthromes version 2 data were calculated using a 100 km2 equal area hexagonal discrete global grid format. For presentation, we grouped anthromes as either low intensity or high intensity to show differences in use between Indigenous Peoples’ and other lands. Remote rangelands, remote woodlands, inhabited treeless and barren lands, wild woodlands and wild treeless and barren lands anthromes were classified as low intensity; urban, dense settlement, rice village, irrigated village, rainfed village, pastoral village, residential irrigated croplands, residential rainfed croplands and populated croplands were classified as high intensity.